Thomas Schneider

The Complexity of Hybrid Logics over Restricted Frame Classes

Dissertation, Jena, 2007

This dissertation examines the computational complexity of decision problems for a collection of
hybrid logics over different classes of frames.

Hybrid logics are extensions of modal logic that allow, in addition to the usual perspective
on states and their successors in relational structures, for naming and accessing states of a
structure explicitly. These features are very desirable in many applications, for example,
in the temporal or epistemic context.

We will systematically examine decidability and the computational complexity of
satisfiability and the model-checking problem for a systematic collection of hybrid languages
with respect to temporally and epistemically relevant classes of structures. This includes
establishing a hierarchy of all relevant languages
over these classes, arranging results from the literature into this hierarchy,
and contributing our own results.
In particular, we prove the following main results, involving a wide range of
techniques for establishing complexity bounds of logics.

* The model-checking problem for all binder languages remains PSPACE-complete
  over restricted classes of structures. (Chapter 4)

* The satisfiability problem for hybrid until/since languages over transitive structures
  is EXPTIME-hard and in 2EXPTIME. (Section 5.4)

* The satisfiability problem for almost all extensions of the smallest binder language
  over transitive structures is undecidable. (Section 5.4)

* The satisfiability problem for hybrid until/since languages over transitive trees
  is EXPTIME-complete. (Section 5.5)

* The satisfiability problem for all binder languages over transitive trees is
  nonelementarily decidable. (Section 5.5)

* The satisfiability problem for binder-free hybrid languages over ER structures
  is NP-complete. (Section 5.8)

* The satisfiability problem for the language with all operators over ER structures
  is N2EXPTIME-complete. (Section 5.8)

* The satisfiability problem for all remaining hybrid languages over ER structures
  is NEXPTIME-complete. (Section 5.8)

* The satisfiability problem for the bi-modal version of the smallest binder language
  over many classes of structures, including many restricted ones,
  is undecidable. (Chapter 6)

This dissertation contains material presented at, and published in the proceedings of,
the workshops "Methods for Modalities" (2005, accepted for a special issue
of the Journal of Logic, Language and Information) and "Hybrid Logic" (2006 and 2007).

